पुरा हयग्रीवमहासुरेण षष्ठान्तरान्तोद्यदकाण्डकल्पे ।
निद्रोन्मुखब्रह्ममुखात् हृतेषु वेदेष्वधित्स: किल मत्स्यरूपम् ॥१॥
पुरा	long ago
हयग्रीव-महा-असुरेण	by Hayagreeva, the great Asura
षष्ठ-अन्तरान्त-उद्यत्-	at the end of the sixth Manvantara
अकाण्ड-कल्पे	in the Naimittika Pralaya
निद्रा-उन्मुख-ब्रह्म-मुखात्-	from the mouth of Brahmaa who was about to sleep
हृतेषु वेदेषु-	when the Vedas were stolen
अधित्स: किल	(Thou) desired to assume
मत्स्य-रूपम्	the form of a Fish
Long ago during the Pralaya which took place at the end of the sixth Manvantara, when Brahmaa was about to sleep, the great Asura Hayagreeva stole the Vedas from his mouth. In order to restore them, Thou decided to incarnate as a fish.
सत्यव्रतस्य द्रमिलाधिभर्तुर्नदीजले तर्पयतस्तदानीम् ।
कराञ्जलौ सञ्ज्वलिताकृतिस्त्वमदृश्यथा: कश्चन बालमीन: ॥२॥
सत्यव्रतस्य	of Satyavrata (the sage who was)
द्रमिल-अधिभर्तु:-	Dramila's king
नदीजले	in the waters of the river (Kritamala)
तर्पयत:-तदानीम्	when he was doing Tarpan
कर-अञ्जलौ	in his joined palms
सञ्ज्वलित-आकृति:-	(in a) lustrous form
त्वम्-अदृश्यथा:	Thou appeared to be seen as
कश्चन बालमीन	some (indescribable) tiny fish
Sage Satyavrata, the king of Dramila, was doing Tarpana in the waters of the river Kritamaalaa. In his joined palms, then, Thou appeared as an lustrous indescribable form of a shining tiny fish.
क्षिप्तं जले त्वां चकितं विलोक्य निन्येऽम्बुपात्रेण मुनि: स्वगेहम् ।
स्वल्पैरहोभि: कलशीं च कूपं वापीं सरश्चानशिषे विभो त्वम् ॥३॥
क्षिप्तं जले	when thrown in the water
त्वां चकितं विलोक्य	seeing Thee very frightened
निन्ये-अम्बु-पात्रेण	carried (Thee) in the water vessel (kamandalu)
मुनि: स्वगेहम्	the sage (Satyavrata) to his own house
स्वल्पै:-अहोभि:	in a few days
कलशीं च कूपं	the pot and the well
वापीं सर:-च-	the tank and the lake
आनशिषे	(Thou) did outgrow
विभो त्वम्	O Lord! Thou
When the royal sage threw Thee in the water, seeing Thee very frightened he took Thee to his home in the kamandalu, the water vessel. In a few days, Thou outgrew the pot, the well, the tank and the lake.
योगप्रभावाद्भवदाज्ञयैव नीतस्ततस्त्वं मुनिना पयोधिम् ।
पृष्टोऽमुना कल्पदिदृक्षुमेनं सप्ताहमास्वेति वदन्नयासी: ॥४॥
योग-प्रभावात्-	by his yogic powers
भवत्-आज्ञया-एव	according to Thy command alone
नीत:-तत:-त्वम्	Thou were then taken
मुनिना पयोधिम्	by the sage to the ocean
पृष्ट:-अमुना	requested by him
कल्प-दिदृक्षुम्-एनम्	desirous to see the pralaya, to him
सप्त-आहम्-आस्व-इति	for seven days wait, thus
वदन्-अयासी:	saying (Thou) disappeared
Then at Thy command sage Satyavrata took Thee to the ocean by means of his yogic powers. On his expressing a desire to see the Pralaya, Thou asked him to wait for seven days. Then Thou disappeared.
प्राप्ते त्वदुक्तेऽहनि वारिधारापरिप्लुते भूमितले मुनीन्द्र: ।
सप्तर्षिभि: सार्धमपारवारिण्युद्घूर्णमान: शरणं ययौ त्वाम् ॥५॥
प्राप्ते त्वत्-उक्ते-अहनि	when the day mentioned by Thee arrived
वारि-धारा-परिप्लुते भूमितले	by incessant downpour of rain engulfed was the earth
मुनीन्द्र: सप्तर्षिभि: सार्धम्-	the great sage along with the Saptarshis
अपार्-वारिणि-उद्घूर्णमान:	floundering in the vast limitless tremulous waters
शरणं ययौ त्वाम्	sought refuge in Thee
When the day mentioned by Thee arrived, the earth was engulfed by incessant downpour of rain. The great sage Satyavrata along with the Saptarshis floundering in the limitless expanse of tremulous waters sought refuge in Thee.
धरां त्वदादेशकरीमवाप्तां नौरूपिणीमारुरुहुस्तदा ते
तत्कम्पकम्प्रेषु च तेषु भूयस्त्वमम्बुधेराविरभूर्महीयान् ॥६॥
धरां त्वत्-आदेशकरीम्-	the earth carrying out Thy command
अवाप्तां नौ-रूपिणीम्-	in the form of a boat approaching
आरुरुहु:-तदा ते	boarded then they
तत्-कम्प-कम्प्रेषु	terrified by the boat's trembling
च तेषु	and when they (were)
भूय:-त्वम्-	again Thou
अम्बुधे:-आविर्भू:-	from the ocean appeared
महीयन्	with a huge form (of a fish)
Ever obedient to Thee the earth in the form of a boat approached at Thy command which they then boarded. And when they were terrified by the boat's trembling, Thou again appeared in the ocean in the form of a huge fish.
झषाकृतिं योजनलक्षदीर्घां दधानमुच्चैस्तरतेजसं त्वाम् ।
निरीक्ष्य तुष्टा मुनयस्त्वदुक्त्या त्वत्तुङ्गशृङ्गे तरणिं बबन्धु: ॥७॥
झष-आकृतिं	in the form of the fish
योजन-लक्ष-दीर्घां	a lakh of yojana in length
दधानम्-उच्चै:-तर-तेजसम्	gaining super exceeding glory
त्वाम् निरीक्ष्य तुष्टा: मुनय:-	seeing Thee, the sages were very happy
त्वत्-उक्त्या	as commanded by Thee
त्वत्-तुङ्गशृङ्गे	on Thy high horns
तरणिं बबन्धु:	(they) tied the boat
The sages were delighted to see Thee of exceeding glory in the form of a fish about a lakh of yojanas in length. At Thy command, they tied the boat to Thy high prominent horns.
आकृष्टनौको मुनिमण्डलाय प्रदर्शयन् विश्वजगद्विभागान् ।
संस्तूयमानो नृवरेण तेन ज्ञानं परं चोपदिशन्नचारी: ॥८॥
आकृष्ट-नौक:	pulling the boat
मुनि-मण्डलाय प्रदर्शयन्	to the group of sages showing
विश्व-जगत्-विभागान्	the world and its various regions
संस्तूयमान:	Thee being praised
नृवरेण तेन	by that great king Satyavrata
ज्ञानं परं	(Thou) the highest knowledge
च-उपदिशन्-	and bestowing
अचारी:	moved about
As Thou pulled the boat, Thou showed the sages the various regions of the world. The great king Satyavrata sang hymns of Thy glory, and Thou moved about bestowing on him the knowledge of the Aatman.
कल्पावधौ सप्तमुनीन् पुरोवत् प्रस्थाप्य सत्यव्रतभूमिपं तम् ।
वैवस्वताख्यं मनुमादधान: क्रोधाद् हयग्रीवमभिद्रुतोऽभू: ॥९॥
कल्प-अवधौ	At the end of the Pralaya,
सप्तमुनीन्	the seven sages
पुरोवत् प्रस्थाप्य	installed them in their places as before
सत्यव्रत-भूमिपं तं	that king Satyavrata
वैवस्वत-आख्यं	by the name of Vaivasvata
मनुम्-आदधान:	installed as Manu
क्रोधात्-हयग्रीवम्-अभिद्रुत:-अभू:	(then) in great wrath attacked the demon Hayagreeva
At the end of the Pralaya, Thou installed the seven sages in their places as before. The king Satyavrata was installed as the Vaivasvata Manu. Then Thou attacked the demon Hayagreeva in great rage.
स्वतुङ्गशृङ्गक्षतवक्षसं तं निपात्य दैत्यं निगमान् गृहीत्वा ।
विरिञ्चये प्रीतहृदे ददान: प्रभञ्जनागारपते प्रपाया: ॥१०॥
स्व-तुङ्ग-शृङ्ग-क्षत-वक्षसं	whose chest was torn apart by Thy high horn
तं निपात्य दैत्यं	killing that Asura
निगमान् गृहीत्वा	recovering the Vedas
विरिञ्चये प्रीतहृदे ददान:	(Thou) gave to Brahmaa who was very happy
प्रभञ्जन-आगारपते	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
प्रपाया:	protect me
Thou with Thy great horns tore apart the chest of the Asura Hayagreeva and killed him. Then recovering the Vedas, handed them over to the delighted Brahmaa. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Protect me.